The Public Service Employment Act (PSEA)
defines “political activity” as
any activity  in support of, within,
or in opposition to a political party
or a candidate before or during an
election period, or  seeking nomination as,
or being, a candidate in a municipal, provincial,
territorial or federal election,
before or during the election period.
In your new role as a manager, you are
responsible for providing advice and guidance
to your employees regarding non-partisanship
and political activities, with the support
of your designated political activities
representative (or DPAR).
In this section you will learn to
identify what constitutes political activities ,
and recognize when permission from the
Public Service Commission is required
to participate in political activities.
This section should take you
approximately 10 minutes to complete.
Non-partisanship is an essential element of a
professional public service and a responsible
democratic government. Upholding the
non-partisan character of the public service
is the responsibility of all public service employees.
According to the Public Service Employment Act
(PSEA), public service employees can engage
in political activities if those activities
do not impair, or are not seen to impair,
their ability to perform their public service
duties in a politically impartial manner.
Political activities can be divided into
two categories: candidacy (seeking nomination as,
or to be, a candidate) and non-candidacy.
Any public servant wishing to seek nomination
as or to be a candidate in an election
at the municipal, provincial, territorial, or federal
level must first request permission
from the Public Service Commission.
That permission, if granted, may be subject to
conditions to address potential risks to
political impartiality, which may include
a requirement to take leave without pay.
If elected at the provincial, territorial or federal
level, a public service employee would cease
to be a public servant on the day
they are declared elected.
In the case of non-candidacy, which includes
political activities in support of or in opposition
to a political party or candidate, permission
from the Public Service Commission not required.
In these instances, public service employees
are responsible for making informed decisions
about whether the activities could impair
(or be perceived as impairing) their ability
to perform their duties in an impartial manner.
Public servants wishing to engage
in political activities are encouraged to
consult their organization’s designated political
activities representative, their values and ethics
advisor, or the Political Activities and
Non-Partisanship Division
at the Public Service Commission.
Allegations of improper political activity
against an employee may be investigated
by the Public Service Commission to determine
if corrective action is appropriate.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have its own ways
of doing things. Take a time out from the course
to watch these short videos and share them
with your employees.
Political Activities: Candidacy
Political Activities: Making an Informed Decision
They are an excellent source of information
if  you or any of your employees are considering
becoming a candidate in a federal, provincial,
territorial or municipal election, or
participating in political activities.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.